---

title: "You Were Lied to About Pulleys"
layout: default
tags:
- physics
- mechanics

---

In elementary school, we all learn the simple machines. I remember
being very disappointed that we were supposed to be learning about
*machines*, but all studied were stupid things that just sat there,
like ramps an pulleys. A ramp isn't a machine. There's not that much
difference between a ramp and a steep hill, but people would look at
you like a madman if you called a hill a machine.

Part of the reason that the discussion of simple machines is so
disappointing is because they're usually taught in a misguided
way. The lever works like a teeter-totter. The wheel and axle make it
easy to move things because they roll.  The ramp let's you get that
wheel up the steeps.  Then the pulley....  well, it let's you lift
thing by pulling down, which is way easier than pulling up.  Far less
likely to throw your back out. Oh, and you can tie the rope off to
hold it in place.  Yeah, that's what pulleys are for.  Now, who wants
a juice box.

In actuality, all of the simple machines are based behind a simple
idea: I'm willing to apply a small force over a long distance in
exchange for moving something heavy for a very short distance.

At some point, we've all seen the sitcom scene where the dumb
character is in the gym and is told to do 20 reps with 15 pounds.  The
dumb character decides to save time and just do one rep at 300
pounds. We're all supposed to laugh at how stupid he's being, but the
joke usually falls flat.  As an aside, how come no one ever does the
joke the other way around?  Just once, I'd like to see the camera cut
back to the character pounding through 300 reps with a one pound
weight. We could listen to the character rapidly count out the numbers
(247,248,249,250) while his arm flails up and down unathletically with
a pitifully small dumbbell easily contained in his palm.

Moving back to the point, we all know that there are things too heavy
for us to lift.  However, when something is easy to lift, we can
usually carry it pretty far. The reason this becomes important is one
of the great physics relations:

$$ Energy = Force \times Distance $$

(I'm going to take a moment to apologize here for the fact that I
haven't actually defined energy or force. I'll save that for a later
post, and I'll link to that one once it's written.  In the mean, you
can roughly think of force as how hard something is being pushed and
energy as a measure of how much force something contains.  They're
much deeper than that and you'll have to forget this description
later, but it will work for the length of this post.)

The key bit about the above relationship is that, if we go a longer
distance, we don't need as much force to do the job. All of the simple
machines are ways to provide a small amount of force over a long
distance to provide a larger force over a small distance.

We'll start with the lever. The teeter-totter is a horrible analogy,
since the two people sit the same distance away from each other.
Instead, just think about a crowbar.  You place the crowbar in
something that is stuck, push the bar as far as you can, and whatever
you were prying on only moved less than an inch. Of course, you
couldn't have moved it that tiny amount by yourself - that's why you
needed the crowbar in the first place. So you moved the crowbar a long
distance in exchange for opening whatever was stuck by a tiny
distance.

Next comes the ramp. The ramp is about moving a long distance in an
easy direction to escape needing to move a short distance in a hard
direction. Think about pushing a heavy cart up a ramp.  Still seems
like hard work, right? What's being gained from this? Well, try
imagining that I took the ramp away and there's just a three foot wall
in your path.  Now my hypotheticals are just getting sadistic. Does it
seem impossible?

It's not impossible.  You just pick up the entire cart and carry it
over the wall.  Of course, that's not what we imagine in these sort of
situations, because our intuition tells us that's it's stupid.  When
we have a heavy cart that's already a pain to move, we're certainly
not going to pick it up and carry it over the wall, because we can't.
The cart is just too heavy.  However, if there's a ramp, then we can
very slowly lift the cart over the wall.  It's to heavy for us to lift
the cart three feet, but we can push it upward very slightly over the
course of twenty feet and we'll be just fine.

Now comes the wheel and axle. This one might seem like it doesn't fit,
because wheels aren't about multiplying force.  The catch is that the
"wheel and axle" of a simple machine have nothing to do with the wheel
and axle that we push our carts around one. Instead, when the Ancient
Greeks first cataloged the simple machines, they were thinking more of
a bucket entering a well.


~~~~~~
         /\
        /   \
       /     \
      /       \
      I       I
   H  I       I
   H__I__===__I
   H  I  |    I
   H  I  |    I
      OOOO0OOO0
MMMMMMO0OOO0OOOMMMMMMMMMM
      O  |    O
      O  |    0
      O~~~~~~~O
      0  |    O
      O  A    O
      O  U    O
~~~~~~

In case my text are diagram isn't perfectly clear, there's a bucket
(U) lowered into a stone well by a rope (|).  The rope is tied around
an axle (_) that connects to a big wheel (H). When you make a full
rotation of the wheel, you also make a full rotation of the axle.
Since the wheel is large, it's a long way around to make a full
rotation.  Conversely, the axle is narrow and only pulls up a tiny bit
of rope with each rotation.  Again, since we've shrunk the distance,
we've increased the force, so the heavy water jug comes up much more
easily than if we tried to just turn the axle by hand.

Finally, we come to the pulley.  The great lie of elementary school
science. The reason it's a great lies is because the way it's usually
presented is completely wrong.  The diagram often looks something like
this:


~~~~~~
   /O\
   | |
   | |
   | |
   A |
 XXX |
 XXX \O/
 XXX  |
 XXX / \
~~~~~~~~~

There's some poor fool trying to lift a heavy object and using a
pulley on the ceiling to make their job /easier/.  The great lie is
that this pulley *doesn't do anything*. It takes just as much force to
lift the block with the pulley as without it.  Nothing is being
accomplished here.  This isn't a simple machine - it's a waste of time.

A better use of pulleys can be seen here:

~~~~~~
 /O\ /O\
 | | | |
 | | | |
 | | | |
 A \O/ |
 XXXXX |
 XXXXX \0/
 XXXXX  |
 XXXXX / \
~~~~~~~~~

At first glance, this is the same situation, but worse.  We now have
three pulleys.  We already know that one pulley does nothing.  Three
pulleys might seem like an even bigger waste.  The key is to look at
the ropes.  The rope now touches the block three ways:  It's tied to
the block at the (A), it comes down to the pulley at the (O), and it
comes back off the pulley at the (O).

If the block is raised one foot into the air, each of these three rope
section is shortened by one foot. However, since it's all really one
big rope running through some pulleys, that means the person pulling
the rope needs to have pulled it three feet.  See where this is going?
The block moved one foot, but the person pulled the rope three feet,
so the block was lifted with three times as much force as the person
pulled the rope.  We now have a real, useful machine that lets us lift
things that we never could before.  The beauty of the pulley isn't
that it let's us pull something in a different direction, but rather
that each pulley let's us multiply the amount of force we can
provide.

This is why we're supposed to be learning about simple machines in
school.  We get an understanding of how we can trade some things that
are plentiful, like distance, for things that we don't have, like
force.
